# A Forlorn Hope

Working in cybersecurity is a battle. To pick up the guidon and charge forward into the breach is a commitment to undertake what is clearly a forlorn hope. For as long as you survive, you can expect nothing but frustration and pain. Survival itself is a victory, but a small one in the grand scheme of things. It is merely one step forward in a perpetual struggle against carelessness, shortsightedness, ignorance, and disdain. When you preach, you find yourself preaching to the choir. You struggle to gather an audience, only for those who show up to smile politely as they continue on with business as usual. You take a step forward, and there is a line of people wanting to knock you backwards. What’s the point?

The people you’ve heard from in this volume are a small sample set, but they are reflective of the wider collection of practitioners, academics, and others who continue to fight despite the conditions and the odds. These people are not suckers; they recognize that what they are doing isn’t immediate or essential in the eyes of most, but they also recognize the importance of what is at stake in the long term. As most of them are students of history to one degree or another, they know that everyone who listens, everyone they can help, builds resilience. They know that the day will come when they will be called upon to put their hard-won knowledge and experience to good use, meaningful use, on a large scale. They hope that is the case anyway, because the alternative—an ill-informed, knee-jerk, politically-expedient solution—is likely to do as much damage to cyberspace, as the triggering calamity.

If our subjects have taught us anything, it is that there is no single pathway into the field, nor is there any single track, or course of action, that will lead to a successful career. What works for one might work for another, but the freeway or the road less traveled are equally likely to get you where you want to go. It matters little where you developed your skills, or how your experience was gained; success in cybersecurity is in large part about having a sense of curiosity, tenacity, and ingenuity. 

As interesting as this field is, it is a field of endeavor just like any other. There are people who are helpful, and there are people whose behavior is beyond reprehensible. You can expect generosity and extraordinary acts of kindness, and you can expect to face man’s inhumanity to his fellow man. If this is truly a cause for which you are willing to struggle, then acting and behaving in ways that make the field as inclusive as possible—and just being decent human beings—is critical. We do, after all, need all the help we can get.

Perhaps the most important lesson imparted by our subjects is the importance of having a sense of perspective. This is a field that is far older than a great many practitioners know. The body of knowledge is expansive, the lessons learned extensive, and we should take every effort to promulgate both at every opportunity, not just to those we want to help, but to those we work with. Consider every expression of ignorance of what came before as a “teaching moment,” not an opportunity for snark. Though the latter may be easier, the former is more likely to advance the cause.

Knowing our history also helps us understand how our work is likely to be viewed, what is likely to succeed, what is worth falling on our swords over, and what is worth letting slide. Cybersecurity is not nearly the issue cybersecurity practitioners think it is. For those who carry the weight of the world on their shoulders, it is blood, not bytes, that takes precedence. That we are fighting to reduce or eliminate future bloodshed matters not. We are, by nature, predisposed to ignore or delay dealing with issues that are not front of mind, regardless of how “good for us” it would be. Success is about playing the long game, husbanding our resources, picking our battles, and building alliances. We cannot stop what is coming, but we can have an impact on what happens afterward if we have a coherent message, delivered by a unified community, that is ready with sound and practical solutions. 
